=encoding utf8


=head1 Whim

Whim is a command-line utility for sending, receiving, and working with L<webmentions|https://jmac.org/webmention/>.

Notable features include:

=over

=item *

A daemon to receive and store incoming webmentions



=item *

A webmention verifier, suitable for scheduled operation



=item *

A tool for sending webmentions, individually or en masse (given a source URL)



=item *

Commands to query a local database of received webmentions



=item *

A simple webserver to display webmention-powered comment sections as HTML, suitable for JavaScript-driven insertion into an otherwise static webpage



=back


=head2 Project status

=head3 It's alpha

I<This software is very young>, with present-but-incomplete documentation and inflexible configuration. It is I<absolutely> full of not just bugs but questionable design decisions that I have yet to acknowledge and address.

I began this project in the spring of 2020, and hope to continue improving it over the course of the year. L<See the project's Issues tracker for ongoing status updates.|https://github.com/jmacdotorg/whim/issues>

If you'd like to explore more mature alternatives than Whim for working with Webmention, please see L<the author's Webmention resource page|https://jmac.org/webmention>.

=head3 Contact and support

I'd be happy to answer any questions about this project or L<via email|mailto:jmac@jmac.org>. You may also wish to join the L<"#whim" channel on Freenode IRC|http://webchat.freenode.net/?channels=%23whim>, where I am likely idling but listening as C<jmac>.


=head2 Installing Whim

You need the following stuff already installed to run Whim:

=over 

=item * 

SQLite

=item * 

Perl (version 5.24.0 or higher)

=item *

The `cpanm` command-line program. It is likely available as "cpanminus" in your favorite package manager. You can also install it through the instructions at L<https://cpanmin.us>.

=back

=head3 Installing Whim via CPAN

 $ cpanm Whim

=head3 Installing Whim from source

Install dependencies:

 $ cpanm --installdeps .
 
If you want to test Whim before installing it (this step is optional):

 $ prove -l t/ xt/
 ⋮
 Result: PASS

Finally, install Whim:

 $ perl Makefile.PL
 $ make
 $ make install

=head2 Running whim

The C<whim> executable accepts the following subcommands.

=over

=item *

C<listen>: Run a daemon that listens for incoming webmentions and stores them in a local database.

See also L<"Displaying webmentions">, below.



=item *

C<send>: Send webmentions.



=item *

C<query>: Query a local database for stored, verified webmentions meeting given criteria, and display the results as a human-readable summary.

(It I<should> offer JSON output as well, but alas it does not right now.)

This command also lets you view and modify a blocklist of unwelcome webmention sources. Blocked webmentions don't appear in query results.

=item *

C<verify>: Try to verify every stored webmention that requires verification.

=back

For quick help on any command, run C<whim help [command]>.

For more complete documentation, run C<man whim>.

=head2 Displaying webmentions

Besides listening for incoming webmentions, the C<listen> command also sets up an HTTP endpont at C</display_wms>. It accepts GET requests that contain one query-string argument, C<url>. Whim will fetch and display, as HTML, all verified webmentions whose source matches the given URL.

For example:

  http//example.com:8080/display_wms?url=https://some-source.example/foobar

Whim uses a set of default templates to make this work. You can provide your own templates in C<$HOME/.whim/templates>. The fact that I have no further information for you about this is a known issue. (GitHub issue #34)

=head2 "Whim"?

Two possible explanations:

=over

=item 1.

It stands for L<B<whi>te B<m>atter|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_matter>, the connective tissue betweeen separate neurological structures in the human brain. Its function resembles Webmention's role in allowing independent websites to communicate, and thus helping their respective authors to collaborate.



=item 2.

Whim puts the I<hi!> in B<w>ebB<m>entions.



=back

=head2 Author and contributors

Whim's lead developer is Jason McIntosh.

Contributors include:

=over

=item *

Adam Herzog

=item *

Brian Wisti

=back

=head2 Copyright and licence

This software is Copyright (c) 2020 by Jason McIntosh.

This is free software, licensed under the MIT License.
